README.md, before:

# Chatterbox TTS - Apple Silicon Optimized

A high-performance text-to-speech (TTS) and voice conversion system optimized for Apple Silicon Macs, achieving **2-3x faster inference** through MPS (Metal Performance Shaders) GPU acceleration.

## 🎯 Project Goals & Achievements

This project successfully optimized the Chatterbox TTS model for Apple Silicon, meeting the ambitious target of generating **1 minute of audio in under 20 seconds** on M1/M2 Macs.

### Key Performance Metrics:
- **Warm-up Speed**: 12.27 iterations/second (75% improvement)
- **Generation Speed**: 15-17+ iterations/second without reference audio
- **Real-world Performance**: 20.10s of audio generated in 59.34s (RTF: 2.95)
- **Target Achieved**: ✅ Can generate >1 minute of audio in <20 seconds

## 🚀 Features

- **Apple Silicon MPS Optimization**: Custom patches for efficient GPU utilization
- **Fast Model Loading**: CPU-first loading strategy with optimized GPU transfer
- **Smart Warm-up**: Pre-compilation of MPS kernels for consistent performance
- **Latency Monitoring**: Real-time performance metrics and RTF calculations
- **Gradio Web Interface**: User-friendly UI for both TTS and voice conversion
- **Adjustable Generation Steps**: Control generation length/quality with steps slider (100-2000, default: 1000)

## 📊 Technical Implementation

### MPS Optimization Strategy

The key innovation is the `mps_fast_patch.py` module that addresses PyTorch MPS limitations:

1. **Problem**: LlamaRotaryEmbedding moves tensors to CPU for trigonometric operations on every forward pass
2. **Solution**: Pre-compute all cos/sin values once and keep them on MPS
3. **Result**: Eliminates expensive CPU↔MPS transfers during inference

### Model Loading Sequence

```python
1. Load model on CPU (handles CUDA-saved checkpoints)
2. Transfer components to MPS
3. Apply FastMPSRotaryEmbedding patch
4. Run warm-up generation
5. Ready for fast inference
```

## 🛠️ Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/clockworksquirrel/chatterbox.git
cd chatterbox

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 💻 Usage

### Text-to-Speech (TTS)

```bash
python gradio_tts_app.py
```

Features:
- Text input with automatic chunking for long texts
- Reference audio upload for voice cloning
- Adjustable parameters:
  - **Generation Steps**: 100-2000 (default: 1000) - controls max generation length
  - **Exaggeration**: 0.25-2.0 (default: 0.5) - controls expressiveness
  - **CFG/Pace**: 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.5) - controls generation guidance
  - **Temperature**: 0.05-5.0 (default: 0.8) - controls randomness
  - Advanced options: min_p, top_p, repetition_penalty

### Voice Conversion

```bash
python gradio_vc_app.py
```

Features:
- Source audio upload/recording
- Reference voice selection
- Automatic voice characteristic transfer

### Command-line Examples

```bash
# Basic TTS
python example_tts.py

# Voice conversion
python example_vc.py

# macOS-specific optimized example
python example_for_mac.py
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **"MPS backend out of memory"**
   - Reduce batch size or chunk size
   - Close other GPU-intensive applications

2. **Slow first generation**
   - This is normal - MPS compiles kernels on first use
   - Subsequent generations will be much faster

3. **Model loading errors**
   - Ensure you have enough RAM (16GB recommended)
   - Check that all model files downloaded correctly

## 📈 Performance Optimization Tips

1. **Use the default 1000 steps** for balanced quality/speed
2. **Lower steps (500-800)** for faster generation of shorter audio
3. **Higher steps (1500-2000)** for longer, more detailed generations
4. **Keep exaggeration around 0.5** for natural-sounding speech
5. **Enable warm-up** to ensure consistent performance

## 🛠️ Development

This project was created through an innovative AI-assisted development process:

- **[Cursor AI](https://cursor.sh/)** - AI-powered code editor that helped implement the MPS optimizations
- **Claude Opus 4** - Provided expertise on PyTorch MPS optimization and transformer architectures  
- **Vibe Coding** - Collaborative AI-human development approach
- **[CodeRabbit](https://coderabbit.ai/)** - Monitors all updates and ensures code quality

The entire optimization was achieved through natural language descriptions of the desired improvements, with AI handling the implementation details while maintaining human oversight and direction.

## 📝 Recent Updates

### December 21, 2024
- Added adjustable generation steps slider (100-2000 range)
- Updated TTS interface with steps parameter
- Fixed voice conversion app to use correct API
- Improved documentation and error handling
- **Bug fixes and optimizations:**
  - Added input validation for audio tensor inputs in voice conversion
  - Fixed temporary file cleanup with proper try-finally blocks
  - Removed unused imports and unnecessary f-strings
  - Improved code structure with GenerationConfig dataclass
  - Enhanced error handling and resource management

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- ResembleAI for the original Chatterbox model
- PyTorch team for MPS backend development
- Apple for Metal Performance Shaders framework

---

*Optimized with ❤️ for Apple Silicon by the Vibe Coding community*

# Chatterbox TTS

[![Alt Text](https://img.shields.io/badge/listen-demo_samples-blue)](https://resemble-ai.github.io/chatterbox_demopage/)
[![Alt Text](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/badges/resolve/main/open-in-hf-spaces-sm.svg)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ResembleAI/Chatterbox)
[![Alt Text](https://static-public.podonos.com/badges/insight-on-pdns-sm-dark.svg)](https://podonos.com/resembleai/chatterbox)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/1377773249798344776?label=join%20discord&logo=discord&style=flat)](https://discord.gg/rJq9cRJBJ6)

_Made with ♥️ by <a href="https://resemble.ai" target="_blank"><img width="100" alt="resemble-logo-horizontal" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/35cf756b-3506-4943-9c72-c05ddfa4e525" /></a>

We're excited to introduce Chatterbox, [Resemble AI's](https://resemble.ai) first production-grade open source TTS model. Licensed under MIT, Chatterbox has been benchmarked against leading closed-source systems like ElevenLabs, and is consistently preferred in side-by-side evaluations.

Whether you're working on memes, videos, games, or AI agents, Chatterbox brings your content to life. It's also the first open source TTS model to support **emotion exaggeration control**, a powerful feature that makes your voices stand out. Try it now on our [Hugging Face Gradio app.](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ResembleAI/Chatterbox)

If you like the model but need to scale or tune it for higher accuracy, check out our competitively priced TTS service (<a href="https://resemble.ai">link</a>). It delivers reliable performance with ultra-low latency of sub 200ms—ideal for production use in agents, applications, or interactive media.

# Key Details
- SoTA zeroshot TTS
- 0.5B Llama backbone
- Unique exaggeration/intensity control
- Ultra-stable with alignment-informed inference
- Trained on 0.5M hours of cleaned data
- Watermarked outputs
- Easy voice conversion script
- [Outperforms ElevenLabs](https://podonos.com/resembleai/chatterbox)

# Tips
- **General Use (TTS and Voice Agents):**
  - The default settings (`exaggeration=0.5`, `cfg_weight=0.5`) work well for most prompts.
  - If the reference speaker has a fast speaking style, lowering `cfg_weight` to around `0.3` can improve pacing.

- **Expressive or Dramatic Speech:**
  - Try lower `cfg_weight` values (e.g. `~0.3`) and increase `exaggeration` to around `0.7` or higher.
  - Higher `exaggeration` tends to speed up speech; reducing `cfg_weight` helps compensate with slower, more deliberate pacing.


# Installation
```shell
pip install chatterbox-tts
```

Alternatively, you can install from source:
```shell
# conda create -yn chatterbox python=3.11
# conda activate chatterbox

git clone https://github.com/resemble-ai/chatterbox.git
cd chatterbox
pip install -e .
```
We developed and tested Chatterbox on Python 3.11 on Debain 11 OS; the versions of the dependencies are pinned in `pyproject.toml` to ensure consistency. You can modify the code or dependencies in this installation mode.


# Usage
```python
import torchaudio as ta
from chatterbox.tts import ChatterboxTTS

model = ChatterboxTTS.from_pretrained(device="cuda")

text = "Ezreal and Jinx teamed up with Ahri, Yasuo, and Teemo to take down the enemy's Nexus in an epic late-game pentakill."
wav = model.generate(text)
ta.save("test-1.wav", wav, model.sr)

# If you want to synthesize with a different voice, specify the audio prompt
AUDIO_PROMPT_PATH = "YOUR_FILE.wav"
wav = model.generate(text, audio_prompt_path=AUDIO_PROMPT_PATH)
ta.save("test-2.wav", wav, model.sr)
```
See `example_tts.py` and `example_vc.py` for more examples.

# Supported Lanugage
Currenlty only English.

# Acknowledgements
- [Cosyvoice](https://github.com/FunAudioLLM/CosyVoice)
- [Real-Time-Voice-Cloning](https://github.com/CorentinJ/Real-Time-Voice-Cloning)
- [HiFT-GAN](https://github.com/yl4579/HiFTNet)
- [Llama 3](https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3)
- [S3Tokenizer](https://github.com/xingchensong/S3Tokenizer)

# Built-in PerTh Watermarking for Responsible AI

Every audio file generated by Chatterbox includes [Resemble AI's Perth (Perceptual Threshold) Watermarker](https://github.com/resemble-ai/perth) - imperceptible neural watermarks that survive MP3 compression, audio editing, and common manipulations while maintaining nearly 100% detection accuracy.


## Watermark extraction

You can look for the watermark using the following script.

```python
import perth
import librosa

AUDIO_PATH = "YOUR_FILE.wav"

# Load the watermarked audio
watermarked_audio, sr = librosa.load(AUDIO_PATH, sr=None)

# Initialize watermarker (same as used for embedding)
watermarker = perth.PerthImplicitWatermarker()

# Extract watermark
watermark = watermarker.get_watermark(watermarked_audio, sample_rate=sr)
print(f"Extracted watermark: {watermark}")
# Output: 0.0 (no watermark) or 1.0 (watermarked)
```


# Official Discord

👋 Join us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/rJq9cRJBJ6) and let's build something awesome together!

# Disclaimer
Don't use this model to do bad things. Prompts are sourced from freely available data on the internet.

Commit message:

Usability enhancements + chunking added plus #unlimited text Support
 Useability enhancements

README.md, after:

# Chatterbox TTS - Apple Silicon Optimized

A high-performance text-to-speech (TTS) and voice conversion system optimized for Apple Silicon Macs, achieving **2-3x faster inference** through MPS (Metal Performance Shaders) GPU acceleration.

## 🎯 Project Goals & Achievements

This project successfully optimized the Chatterbox TTS model for Apple Silicon, meeting the ambitious target of generating **1 minute of audio in under 20 seconds** on M1/M2 Macs.

### Key Performance Metrics:
- **Warm-up Speed**: 12.27 iterations/second (75% improvement)
- **Generation Speed**: 15-17+ iterations/second without reference audio
- **Real-world Performance**: 20.10s of audio generated in 59.34s (RTF: 2.95)
- **Target Achieved**: ✅ Can generate >1 minute of audio in <20 seconds

## 🚀 Features

- **Apple Silicon MPS Optimization**: Custom patches for efficient GPU utilization
- **Fast Model Loading**: CPU-first loading strategy with optimized GPU transfer
- **Smart Warm-up**: Pre-compilation of MPS kernels for consistent performance
- **Latency Monitoring**: Real-time performance metrics and RTF calculations
- **Gradio Web Interface**: User-friendly UI for both TTS and voice conversion
- **Adjustable Generation Steps**: Control generation length/quality with steps slider (100-2000, default: 1000)

## 📊 Technical Implementation

### MPS Optimization Strategy

The key innovation is the `mps_fast_patch.py` module that addresses PyTorch MPS limitations:

1. **Problem**: LlamaRotaryEmbedding moves tensors to CPU for trigonometric operations on every forward pass
2. **Solution**: Pre-compute all cos/sin values once and keep them on MPS
3. **Result**: Eliminates expensive CPU↔MPS transfers during inference

### Model Loading Sequence

```python
1. Load model on CPU (handles CUDA-saved checkpoints)
2. Transfer components to MPS
3. Apply FastMPSRotaryEmbedding patch
4. Run warm-up generation
5. Ready for fast inference
```

## 🛠️ Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/clockworksquirrel/chatterbox.git
cd chatterbox

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 💻 Usage

### Text-to-Speech (TTS)

```bash
python gradio_tts_app.py
```

Features:
- Text input with automatic chunking for long texts
- Reference audio upload for voice cloning
- Adjustable parameters:
  - **Generation Steps**: 100-2000 (default: 1000) - controls max generation length
  - **Exaggeration**: 0.25-2.0 (default: 0.5) - controls expressiveness
  - **CFG/Pace**: 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.5) - controls generation guidance
  - **Temperature**: 0.05-5.0 (default: 0.8) - controls randomness
  - Advanced options: min_p, top_p, repetition_penalty

### Voice Conversion

```bash
python gradio_vc_app.py
```

Features:
- Source audio upload/recording
- Reference voice selection
- Automatic voice characteristic transfer

### Command-line Examples

```bash
# Basic TTS
python example_tts.py

# Voice conversion
python example_vc.py

# macOS-specific optimized example
python example_for_mac.py
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **"MPS backend out of memory"**
   - Reduce batch size or chunk size
   - Close other GPU-intensive applications

2. **Slow first generation**
   - This is normal - MPS compiles kernels on first use
   - Subsequent generations will be much faster

3. **Model loading errors**
   - Ensure you have enough RAM (16GB recommended)
   - Check that all model files downloaded correctly

## 📈 Performance Optimization Tips

1. **Use the default 1000 steps** for balanced quality/speed
2. **Lower steps (500-800)** for faster generation of shorter audio
3. **Higher steps (1500-2000)** for longer, more detailed generations
4. **Keep exaggeration around 0.5** for natural-sounding speech
5. **Enable warm-up** to ensure consistent performance

## 🛠️ Development

This project was created through an innovative AI-assisted development process:

- **[Cursor AI](https://cursor.sh/)** - AI-powered code editor that helped implement the MPS optimizations
- **Claude Opus 4** - Provided expertise on PyTorch MPS optimization and transformer architectures  
- **Vibe Coding** - Collaborative AI-human development approach
- **[CodeRabbit](https://coderabbit.ai/)** - Monitors all updates and ensures code quality

The entire optimization was achieved through natural language descriptions of the desired improvements, with AI handling the implementation details while maintaining human oversight and direction.

## 📝 Recent Updates

### June 21, 2025
- Added adjustable generation steps slider (100-2000 range)
- Updated TTS interface with steps parameter
- Fixed voice conversion app to use correct API
- Improved documentation and error handling
- **Bug fixes and optimizations:**
  - Added input validation for audio tensor inputs in voice conversion
  - Fixed temporary file cleanup with proper try-finally blocks
  - Removed unused imports and unnecessary f-strings
  - Improved code structure with GenerationConfig dataclass
  - Enhanced error handling and resource management
- **Unlimited Text Generation Support**: Successfully implemented unlimited text input capability with automatic chunking
  - Tested on M2 MacBook Pro Max with impressive results:
    - Input text: 12,506 characters
    - Audio duration: 850.80 seconds (14.18 minutes)
    - Generation time: 1887.03 seconds (31.45 minutes)
    - Real-time factor (RTF): 2.22x
    - Sample rate: 24,000 Hz
  - The system can now handle texts of any length, from short sentences to entire books
- **Voice Accuracy Note**: Currently working on improving voice cloning accuracy with reference audio files
  - The current TTS implementation has limitations with accent reproduction
  - Example: Northern English accents from ElevenLabs voices are rendered with Australian characteristics
  - We are monitoring Chatterbox development for improvements in this area
  - Will update our implementation as soon as better voice cloning capabilities become available

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- ResembleAI for the original Chatterbox model
- PyTorch team for MPS backend development
- Apple for Metal Performance Shaders framework

---

*Optimized with ❤️ for Apple Silicon by the Vibe Coding community*

# Chatterbox TTS

[![Alt Text](https://img.shields.io/badge/listen-demo_samples-blue)](https://resemble-ai.github.io/chatterbox_demopage/)
[![Alt Text](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/badges/resolve/main/open-in-hf-spaces-sm.svg)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ResembleAI/Chatterbox)
[![Alt Text](https://static-public.podonos.com/badges/insight-on-pdns-sm-dark.svg)](https://podonos.com/resembleai/chatterbox)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/1377773249798344776?label=join%20discord&logo=discord&style=flat)](https://discord.gg/rJq9cRJBJ6)

_Made with ♥️ by <a href="https://resemble.ai" target="_blank"><img width="100" alt="resemble-logo-horizontal" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/35cf756b-3506-4943-9c72-c05ddfa4e525" /></a>

We're excited to introduce Chatterbox, [Resemble AI's](https://resemble.ai) first production-grade open source TTS model. Licensed under MIT, Chatterbox has been benchmarked against leading closed-source systems like ElevenLabs, and is consistently preferred in side-by-side evaluations.

Whether you're working on memes, videos, games, or AI agents, Chatterbox brings your content to life. It's also the first open source TTS model to support **emotion exaggeration control**, a powerful feature that makes your voices stand out. Try it now on our [Hugging Face Gradio app.](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ResembleAI/Chatterbox)

If you like the model but need to scale or tune it for higher accuracy, check out our competitively priced TTS service (<a href="https://resemble.ai">link</a>). It delivers reliable performance with ultra-low latency of sub 200ms—ideal for production use in agents, applications, or interactive media.

# Key Details
- SoTA zeroshot TTS
- 0.5B Llama backbone
- Unique exaggeration/intensity control
- Ultra-stable with alignment-informed inference
- Trained on 0.5M hours of cleaned data
- Watermarked outputs
- Easy voice conversion script
- [Outperforms ElevenLabs](https://podonos.com/resembleai/chatterbox)

# Tips
- **General Use (TTS and Voice Agents):**
  - The default settings (`exaggeration=0.5`, `cfg_weight=0.5`) work well for most prompts.
  - If the reference speaker has a fast speaking style, lowering `cfg_weight` to around `0.3` can improve pacing.

- **Expressive or Dramatic Speech:**
  - Try lower `cfg_weight` values (e.g. `~0.3`) and increase `exaggeration` to around `0.7` or higher.
  - Higher `exaggeration` tends to speed up speech; reducing `cfg_weight` helps compensate with slower, more deliberate pacing.


# Installation
```shell
pip install chatterbox-tts
```

Alternatively, you can install from source:
```shell
# conda create -yn chatterbox python=3.11
# conda activate chatterbox

git clone https://github.com/resemble-ai/chatterbox.git
cd chatterbox
pip install -e .
```
We developed and tested Chatterbox on Python 3.11 on Debain 11 OS; the versions of the dependencies are pinned in `pyproject.toml` to ensure consistency. You can modify the code or dependencies in this installation mode.


# Usage
```python
import torchaudio as ta
from chatterbox.tts import ChatterboxTTS

model = ChatterboxTTS.from_pretrained(device="cuda")

text = "Ezreal and Jinx teamed up with Ahri, Yasuo, and Teemo to take down the enemy's Nexus in an epic late-game pentakill."
wav = model.generate(text)
ta.save("test-1.wav", wav, model.sr)

# If you want to synthesize with a different voice, specify the audio prompt
AUDIO_PROMPT_PATH = "YOUR_FILE.wav"
wav = model.generate(text, audio_prompt_path=AUDIO_PROMPT_PATH)
ta.save("test-2.wav", wav, model.sr)
```
See `example_tts.py` and `example_vc.py` for more examples.

# Supported Lanugage
Currenlty only English.

# Acknowledgements
- [Cosyvoice](https://github.com/FunAudioLLM/CosyVoice)
- [Real-Time-Voice-Cloning](https://github.com/CorentinJ/Real-Time-Voice-Cloning)
- [HiFT-GAN](https://github.com/yl4579/HiFTNet)
- [Llama 3](https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3)
- [S3Tokenizer](https://github.com/xingchensong/S3Tokenizer)

# Built-in PerTh Watermarking for Responsible AI

Every audio file generated by Chatterbox includes [Resemble AI's Perth (Perceptual Threshold) Watermarker](https://github.com/resemble-ai/perth) - imperceptible neural watermarks that survive MP3 compression, audio editing, and common manipulations while maintaining nearly 100% detection accuracy.


## Watermark extraction

You can look for the watermark using the following script.

```python
import perth
import librosa

AUDIO_PATH = "YOUR_FILE.wav"

# Load the watermarked audio
watermarked_audio, sr = librosa.load(AUDIO_PATH, sr=None)

# Initialize watermarker (same as used for embedding)
watermarker = perth.PerthImplicitWatermarker()

# Extract watermark
watermark = watermarker.get_watermark(watermarked_audio, sample_rate=sr)
print(f"Extracted watermark: {watermark}")
# Output: 0.0 (no watermark) or 1.0 (watermarked)
```


# Official Discord

👋 Join us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/rJq9cRJBJ6) and let's build something awesome together!

# Disclaimer
Don't use this model to do bad things. Prompts are sourced from freely available data on the internet.
